docs/pages/access-controls/guides/locking.mdx, before:

---
title: Session and Identity Locking
description: How to lock compromised users or nodes
---

<Details
  title="Version warning"
  opened={true}
  scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}
  scopeOnly={true}
  min="7.1"
>
  Locking support was introduced in Teleport v7.1. To fully enforce the locks
  at all components, you should update **all** `teleport` binaries in your
  deployment.
</Details>

System administrators can disable a compromised user, node or
prevent access during cluster maintenance by placing a lock
on a session, user or host identity.

Teleport will reject new API requests and terminate active
connections to SSH, database, desktop and Kubernetes sessions
matching the lock's target.

A lock can target the following objects or attributes:

- a Teleport user by the user's name
- a Teleport [RBAC](../reference.mdx) role by the role's name
- an MFA device by the device's UUID
- an OS/UNIX login
- a Teleport node by the node's UUID (effectively unregistering it from the
  cluster)
- a Windows desktop by the desktop's name

## Prerequisites

- Installed [Teleport](../getting-started.mdx) >= (=teleport.version=) or [Teleport Cloud](../../cloud/introduction.mdx)
- [Tctl admin tool](https://goteleport.com/teleport/download) >= (=teleport.version=)

(!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/2. Create a lock

You can create a new lock with `tctl lock` command. Specify the lock target
with one of the following options:

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Username">
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --user=foo@example.com --message="Suspicious activity." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Role">
  All users with assigned roles matching the target role will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --role=contractor --message="All contractor access is disabled for 10h." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Multi-factor device">
  All connections initated with per-session MFA matching the device ID will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --mfa-device=d6c06a18-e147-4232-9dfe-6f83a28d5850 --message="All contractor access is disabled for 10h." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "d6c06a18-e147-4232-9dfe-6f83a28d5850".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Node">
  All connections to the specified node will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --node=363256df-f78a-4d99-803c-bae19da9ede4 --message="The node is under investigation." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Windows Desktop">
  All connections to the specified Windows Desktop will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --windows-desktop=WIN-FMPFM5UF1SS-teleport-example-com --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Details
  title="Troubleshooting: failed to create a lock?"
  opened={false}
>

If your user is missing a lock permission, you will get error when creating
a role:

```txt
ERROR: access denied to perform action "create" on "lock"
```

Create a role `locksmith`:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v4
metadata:
  name: locksmith
spec:
  allow:
    rules:
      - resources: [lock]
        verbs: [list, create, read, update, delete]
```

```code
$ tctl create -f locksmith.yaml
# role 'locksmith' has been created
```

And assign this role to a user. Re-login for this role to take effect.
</Details>

With a lock in force, all established connections involving the lock's target
get terminated while any new requests are rejected.

Errors returned and warnings logged in this situation feature a message of the
form:
```
lock targeting User:"foo@example.com" is in force: Suspicious activity.
```

<Admonition type="note">
You can tweak the message returned to a user with `--message` parameter:

```code
$ tctl lock --user=foo@example.com --message="Please come back tomorrow." --ttl=24h
```
</Admonition>

<Details title="Under the hood: Lock resource and expiration" opened={false}>
Note that without specifying `--ttl` or `--expires` the created lock remains in
force until explicitly removed with `tctl rm`.  Refer to `tctl lock --help` for
the list of all supported parameters.

Under the hood, `tctl lock` creates a resource:

```yaml
kind: lock
version: v2
metadata:
  name: dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1
spec:
  target:
    user: foo@example.com
  message: "Suspicious activity."
  expires: "2021-08-14T22:27:00Z"  # RFC3339 format
```

The `kind: lock` resources can also be created and updated using `tctl create`
as per usual, see the [Admin Guide](../../setup/reference/resources.mdx) for more
details.
</Details>

## Step 2/2. List and delete active locks

Use `tctl get` command to list all active locks:

```code
$ tctl get locks
```

Delete a lock resource:

```code
$ tctl rm locks/24679348-baff-4987-a2cd-e820ab7f9d2b
lock "24679348-baff-4987-a2cd-e820ab7f9d2b" has been deleted
```

Deleting a lock will allow new sessions or host connections.

## Next steps: Locking modes

If a Teleport node or proxy cannot properly synchronize its local lock view
with the backend, there is a decision to be made about whether to rely on the
last known locks. This decision strategy is encoded as one of the two modes:
- `strict` mode causes all interactions to be terminated when the locks are not
  guaranteed to be up to date
- `best_effort` mode keeps relying on the most recent locks

The cluster-wide mode defaults to `best_effort`.
You can set up default locking mode via API or CLI using resource `cluster_auth_preference`
or static configuration file:

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="API or CLI">
    Create a YAML file `cap.yaml` or get the existing file using `tctl get cap`

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      locking_mode: best_effort
    version: v2
    ```

    Create a resource:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Edit the `teleport.yaml` of the Auth server:

    ```yaml
    auth_service:
        authentication:
            locking_mode: best_effort
    ```

    Restart the auth server for the change to take effect.
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

It is also possible to configure the locking mode for a particular role:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v4
metadata:
    name: example-role-with-strict-locking
spec:
    options:
       lock: strict
```

When none of the roles involved in an interaction specify the mode or when
there is no user involved, the mode is taken from the cluster-wide setting.

With multiple potentially conflicting locking modes (the cluster-wide default
and the individual per-role settings) a single occurrence of `strict` suffices
for the local lock view to become evaluated strictly.

Commit message:

Add access request locks to the docs

docs/pages/access-controls/guides/locking.mdx, after:

---
title: Session and Identity Locking
description: How to lock compromised users or nodes
---

<Details
  title="Version warning"
  opened={true}
  scope={["oss", "enterprise"]}
  scopeOnly={true}
  min="7.1"
>
  Locking support was introduced in Teleport v7.1. To fully enforce the locks
  at all components, you should update **all** `teleport` binaries in your
  deployment.
</Details>

System administrators can disable a compromised user, node or
prevent access during cluster maintenance by placing a lock
on a session, user or host identity.

Teleport will reject new API requests and terminate active
connections to SSH, database, desktop and Kubernetes sessions
matching the lock's target.

A lock can target the following objects or attributes:

- a Teleport user by the user's name
- a Teleport [RBAC](../reference.mdx) role by the role's name
- an MFA device by the device's UUID
- an OS/UNIX login
- a Teleport node by the node's UUID (effectively unregistering it from the
  cluster)
- a Windows desktop by the desktop's name
- an [access request](../../enterprise/workflow/index.mdx) by UUID

## Prerequisites

- Installed [Teleport](../getting-started.mdx) >= (=teleport.version=) or [Teleport Cloud](../../cloud/introduction.mdx)
- [Tctl admin tool](https://goteleport.com/teleport/download) >= (=teleport.version=)

(!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/2. Create a lock

You can create a new lock with `tctl lock` command. Specify the lock target
with one of the following options:

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="Username">
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --user=foo@example.com --message="Suspicious activity." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Role">
  All users with assigned roles matching the target role will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --role=contractor --message="All contractor access is disabled for 10h." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Multi-factor device">
  All connections initated with per-session MFA matching the device ID will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --mfa-device=d6c06a18-e147-4232-9dfe-6f83a28d5850 --message="All contractor access is disabled for 10h." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "d6c06a18-e147-4232-9dfe-6f83a28d5850".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Node">
  All connections to the specified node will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --node=363256df-f78a-4d99-803c-bae19da9ede4 --message="The node is under investigation." --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Windows Desktop">
  All connections to the specified Windows Desktop will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --windows-desktop=WIN-FMPFM5UF1SS-teleport-example-com --ttl=10h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Access request">
  All connections using elevated privileges from the matching access request will be locked.
  ```code
  $ tctl lock --access-request=261e80c5-357b-4c43-9b67-40a6bc4c6e4d --ttl=24h
  # Created a lock with name "dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1".
  ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Details
  title="Troubleshooting: failed to create a lock?"
  opened={false}
>

If your user is missing a lock permission, you will get error when creating
a role:

```txt
ERROR: access denied to perform action "create" on "lock"
```

Create a role `locksmith`:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v4
metadata:
  name: locksmith
spec:
  allow:
    rules:
      - resources: [lock]
        verbs: [list, create, read, update, delete]
```

```code
$ tctl create -f locksmith.yaml
# role 'locksmith' has been created
```

And assign this role to a user. Re-login for this role to take effect.
</Details>

With a lock in force, all established connections involving the lock's target
get terminated while any new requests are rejected.

Errors returned and warnings logged in this situation feature a message of the
form:
```
lock targeting User:"foo@example.com" is in force: Suspicious activity.
```

<Admonition type="note">
You can tweak the message returned to a user with `--message` parameter:

```code
$ tctl lock --user=foo@example.com --message="Please come back tomorrow." --ttl=24h
```
</Admonition>

<Details title="Under the hood: Lock resource and expiration" opened={false}>
Note that without specifying `--ttl` or `--expires` the created lock remains in
force until explicitly removed with `tctl rm`.  Refer to `tctl lock --help` for
the list of all supported parameters.

Under the hood, `tctl lock` creates a resource:

```yaml
kind: lock
version: v2
metadata:
  name: dc7cee9d-fe5e-4534-a90d-db770f0234a1
spec:
  target:
    user: foo@example.com
  message: "Suspicious activity."
  expires: "2021-08-14T22:27:00Z"  # RFC3339 format
```

The `kind: lock` resources can also be created and updated using `tctl create`
as per usual, see the [Admin Guide](../../setup/reference/resources.mdx) for more
details.
</Details>

## Step 2/2. List and delete active locks

Use `tctl get` command to list all active locks:

```code
$ tctl get locks
```

Delete a lock resource:

```code
$ tctl rm locks/24679348-baff-4987-a2cd-e820ab7f9d2b
lock "24679348-baff-4987-a2cd-e820ab7f9d2b" has been deleted
```

Deleting a lock will allow new sessions or host connections.

## Next steps: Locking modes

If a Teleport node or proxy cannot properly synchronize its local lock view
with the backend, there is a decision to be made about whether to rely on the
last known locks. This decision strategy is encoded as one of the two modes:
- `strict` mode causes all interactions to be terminated when the locks are not
  guaranteed to be up to date
- `best_effort` mode keeps relying on the most recent locks

The cluster-wide mode defaults to `best_effort`.
You can set up default locking mode via API or CLI using resource `cluster_auth_preference`
or static configuration file:

<Tabs>
  <TabItem label="API or CLI">
    Create a YAML file `cap.yaml` or get the existing file using `tctl get cap`

    ```yaml
    kind: cluster_auth_preference
    metadata:
      name: cluster-auth-preference
    spec:
      locking_mode: best_effort
    version: v2
    ```

    Create a resource:

    ```code
    $ tctl create -f cap.yaml
    # cluster auth preference has been updated
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem label="Static Config">
    Edit the `teleport.yaml` of the Auth server:

    ```yaml
    auth_service:
        authentication:
            locking_mode: best_effort
    ```

    Restart the auth server for the change to take effect.
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

It is also possible to configure the locking mode for a particular role:

```yaml
kind: role
version: v4
metadata:
    name: example-role-with-strict-locking
spec:
    options:
       lock: strict
```

When none of the roles involved in an interaction specify the mode or when
there is no user involved, the mode is taken from the cluster-wide setting.

With multiple potentially conflicting locking modes (the cluster-wide default
and the individual per-role settings) a single occurrence of `strict` suffices
for the local lock view to become evaluated strictly.
